1
Edition- 1
2023
Frequently Asked
Questions (FAQs)
relating to
Conduct of
Elections
2
CONTENTS
Sl.No. CHAPTER Question
No.
Page No.
1. VULNERABILITY MAPPING AND CRITICAL
POLLING STATIONS
1-17 3-4
2. REQUISITION OF PREMISES AND VEHICLES 18-21 5
3. REQUISITION OF STAFF 22-32 6-7
4. FORCE DEPLOYMENT 33-66 8-11
5. LAW AND ORDER 67-86 12-13
6. USE OF VEHICLES 87-107 14-16
7. HONORARIUM, REMUNERATION AND TA/DA 108-129 17-18
8. WELFARE MEASURES FOR POLLING PERSONNEL 130 19
9. WELFARE MEASURES FOR VOTERS 131-141 20-21
10. EX-GRATIA 142-152 22-23
11. STATUTORY AND NON-STATUTORY FORMS 153-161 24-26
12. NON-CAPF MEASURES 162-172 27-28
13. GENERAL ARRANGEMENT FOR POLL 173-188 29-31
14. POLLING AGENTS 189-195 32-33
15. COUNTING 196-219 34-38
16. OTHER IMPORTANT FAQs 220-244 39-42
3
VULNERABILITY MAPPING AND CRITICAL POLLING STATIONS
S. No. Question Answer
1. What is the
definition of
Vulnerability in
context of elections?
Susceptibility of any voter or section of voters to being wrongfully
prevented from or influenced upon in relation to the exercise of
his or her right to vote in a free and fair manner through
intimidation or use of undue influence or force of any kind.
2. What is the purpose
of Vulnerability
Mapping?
To identify in advance such voters or section of voters who are
likely to be vulnerable, the persons or other factors causing such
vulnerability and/or to identify the villages/hamlets/habitats
and segments of electorate vulnerable to any threat, intimidation.
3. What are the stages
of Vulnerability
Mapping?
• Identification of the voters/voter segments, village/hamlets
vulnerable to threat or intimidation or undue influence.
• Identification of the persons causing such vulnerability using
muscle/ money power.
• Initiating preventive measures against the persons responsible
for causing vulnerability.
4. When should the
exercise of VM be
started?
It should be started 6 months before the date of poll of last held
election.
5. When is the time for
final identification of
the vulnerable area
/ segment / village /
hamlet?
The final identification is to be done after the issue of press note
by the Commission and before the issue of the gazette
notification.
6. When is the Sector
Officer appointed to
look after the VM?
4(Four) months before the date of poll of last held election.
7. What is the role of
Sector Police Officer
in VM?
Sector Police Officer will accompany the Sector Officer and jointly
conduct the exercise of Vulnerability Mapping in given area.
8. How many polling
stations are covered
by one Sector
Officer?
10 to 12 polling stations, that can be covered in 1 to 2 hours.
9. Can central govt.
officers be deployed
as Sector Officers?
Yes, if required
10. Who is designated
as Sector
Magistrates during
elections?
Sector Officer is designated as Sector Magistrate for the same
area at least 7 days before the day of poll.
11. What is the
minimum criteria for
Sector Police
Officer?
Not below the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector or Head Constable
of Police.
12. How many times
does the Sector
Officer need to visit
in first stage of VM?
Minimum three visits jointly with HC/ASI/Police Officer
13. Who finalise the list
of critical polling
stations?
Senior Most General and Police Observer appointed by the
Commission.
14. How many reporting
formats are there for
There are 6 reporting formats (VM-1 to VM-6) for Vulnerability
Mapping. The details are available on Commissions’ website at
URL https://eci.gov.in/files/file/15086-instruction-on-
4
Vulnerability
Mapping?
vulnerability-mapping-critical-polling-stations-and-preventivemeasures-regarding
15. What is a critical
polling station?
Polling Stations are categorised critical on basis of certain
objective criteria to ensure enhanced security measures such as
deployment of CAPFs, provision of sufficient Civil measures etc.
The details are available on Commissions’ website at URL
https://eci.gov.in/files/file/15086-instruction-on-vulnerabilitymapping-critical-polling-stations-and-preventive-measuresregarding
16. Is it mandatory to
deploy CAPFs at all
critical polling
stations?
Yes, all critical polling stations shall have deployment of CAPFs
to the maximum possible extent.
17. Is there any
difference between
vulnerability and
Criticality?
Vulnerability is related to voters/voters’
segments/villages/hamlets/areas whereas criticality is related
to polling stations. Vulnerability is one of the parameters for
criticality however, vice versa may not be true.
5
REQUISITION OF PREMISES AND VEHICLES
S. No. Question Answer
18. What are the legal
provisions for requisition of
vehicles and premises?
Sections 160 to 167 of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951 contain various legal provisions
related to requisition.
19. What is the payment of
compensation for
requisition of Premises?
The amount of compensation is determined by
taking into consideration the following:
(i) the rent payable in respect of the premises or if
no rent is so payable, the rent payable for similar
premises in the locality;
(ii) if in consequence of the requisition of the
premises the person interested is compelled to
change his residence or place of business, the
reasonable expenses (if any) incidental to such
change.
 20. What is the payment of
compensation for
requisition of Vehicles?
For Requisition of Vehicles under the jurisdiction
of Central Govt:
no hire charges may be preferred whenever their
vehicles are requisitioned by the concerned State
Government or Union Territory Administration.
However, cost of petrol, oil and minor repairs during
the period of requisition would be borne by the
concerned State Government.
For Requisition of Transport Vehicles (Private):
The State Government shall compensate the owner
of the vehicle determined based on the fares or rates
prevailing in the locality for the hire of such a vehicle.
 21. Which Vehicles are
exempted from
Requisition?
Vehicles of World Health Organisation, UNICEF and
all the organisations of UN, All India Radio,
Doordarshan, Forest Department (Wild life
sanctuaries, National sanctuaries, and National
Games Park) will not be requisitioned for election
duty.
6
REQUISITION OF STAFF
S.No. Question Answer
22. What is the process
for requisition of
Polling Personnel?
Section 159 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 may
be referred to which is available on the Commission’s website at
URL https://eci.gov.in/files/file/15137-the-representation-ofpeople-act-1951.
 The staff of any of the authorities, companies, institutions,
concerns or undertakings mentioned in the Section 159, could
be requisitioned and put on election duty, in addition to
employees of Central and State Governments, in view of the
above amendment
 23. Under which
Act/Rules, polling
officials works under
the ECI during
election?
As per section 28A of the Representation of the People Act,
1951, the officials i.e. Returning Officer, Assistant Returning
Officer, Presiding Officer, Polling Officer, and any other officer
requisitioned under section 159 of the said Act and any police
officer, shall be deemed to be on deputation to the Election
Commission for the period commencing on and from the date of
the notification calling for such election and ending with the
date of declaration of the results of such election.
 24. What are the
exempted category of
departments/depart
ments/Ministries for
requisition of election
staff?
Exempted categories of personnel from being requisitioned for
election duty are as follows:
• Senior officers of the Indian Forest Service
• Medical staff including doctors, nurses, ANMs etc.
(except on health-related election duty)
• Ayurvedic Medical Officer (AMO), Unani Medical Officer
(UMO) and Homoeopathic Medical Officer (HMO) of AYUSH
Department (except on health-related election duty)
• Doctors and Compounders working in veterinary
hospitals.
• Territorial Staff of Forest Department.
• Staff of All India Radio and Doordarshan
• Officers of Food Corporation of India
• Officers of rural branch of Commercial Banks if it is a
single-officer branch
• Operational officers/staff of UPSC
• Besides above, Official due to retire within 6 months’
time or who has already retired but is on extension of service or
re-employed should not be requisitioned for any election related
duty.
• The operational/technical staff of BSNL, MTNL,
Electricity companies will be requisitioned for election duty only
in unavoidable circumstances. However, they can be
requisitioned to perform duty related to their department for
election purpose.
• Employees of Banks and LIC will be drafted on regular
election duty to the minimum extent possible. However, they
can be requisitioned to perform duty of micro-observers.
 25. Is consent of any
person to be deputed
for an election duty
required?
Section 26 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 confers
not only the power to the DEO to appoint unilaterally the
Presiding and Polling Officers but also to impose on them all
7
the obligations of such office irrespective of their consent, at the
peril of prosecution under section 134 of the said Act in default.
 26. How are polling
parties formed?
Polling parties are formed based on Randomization through a
software on the data available in system.
 27. How are election
duties assigned?
Election duties are assigned on the basis of database prepared
by DEO and work is allocated in consideration of pay, rank and
status of the official.
28. What is the procedure
for Randomization of
Polling Personnel?
Randomization comprises of 3 stages:
1st: Randomly identify and select the officials that would be
given training.
2nd: Formation of Assembly Constituency wise team (i.e. polling
party) composition.
3rd: Final allocation of polling stations to polling parties, at the
time of dispersal.
 29. Is randomization of
Police Personnel also
done in the election?
Yes. Randomization of Police personnel at the Polling Station
on the day of poll may be done in the following manner: -
• Police Constables / Home Guards coming from outside the
district can be deployed without randomization.
• In case of Constables / Home Guards of the same District,
they shall be deployed in the Polling Stations falling outside the
area of the Police Station where they are presently posted.
As far as practicable, randomization should be done in such a
manner that they are posted in the same parliamentary
Constituency where they are enrolled as voters to allow them to
exercise their franchise through EDC.
 30. How is
Randomization of
Female Polling
Personnel conducted?
• Manual randomization of female polling personnel is done
instead of computer randomization.
 They should be put on duty in the neighbouring polling
stations through under the guidance of the Observer, so that
they are able to go to the polling stations on the morning of
the poll day at least 2 hours before the start of polling and
assume their duties well in time.
• District Election Officer prepares a negative list of polling
stations, which are inaccessible or remotely located and no
female polling personnel should be posted to such polling
stations.
31. Are persons belonging
to PwD category
deployed during
election?
Physically challenged persons with disabilities defined under
the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, are deployed
on election duty only under unavoidable circumstances.
However, it is ensured that they should not be posted in any
remote area, rather, they should invariably be posted at the
polling stations located at the headquarters.
If any PwD staff inadvertently is deployed at difficult locations,
the RO should make necessary changes manually in
consultation with the Observer.
32. Is randomization
process applicable for
Counting Staff?
Yes, Randomization process comprises of 3 stages:
1st: Randomly drawing 120% of the required number of officials
for each category of counting officials.
2nd: Allocation of Assembly Constituency/Segment.
3rd: Allotment of counting tables.
8
FORCE DEPLOYMENT
S.No. Question Answer
33. What is the meaning
of CAPFs?
Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) is collective name of
Armed police organisations under Ministry of Home Affairs.
34. Which forces
comprise of CAPF?
The Central paramilitary forces broadly consist of following
forces under the control of MHA.
• Border Security Force (BSF)
• Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
• Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
• Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
• Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)
• Any other detailed by MHA
35. What is the purpose
of deployment of
CAPFs ?
The Commission, invariably, directs deployment of CAPFs for
free, fair and peaceful conduct of General Election/ByeElections to the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies.
36. What are the phases
of Force Deployment?
The forces are deployed in 3 different phases viz., Pre-poll
Deployment, Poll Day Deployment and Post-Poll Deployment.
• Poll day deployment is generally done in following four
forms.
• Static deployment, Mobile deployment, Police
Station/Control room deployment and Reserve deployment.
• Pre-poll deployment of CAPFs is done for patrolling, area
domination, naka checking, confidence building measure
etc.
• Post-poll deployment of CAPFs for counting and strong
room duties.
37. What are the major
poll day duties of
CAPF ?
For the poll day, the CAPF shall be assigned:
• Static guarding of chosen polling stations.
• Static guarding of polling stations as part of a mixed
(composite) team with local state forces;
• Patrolling duty on assigned routes (election sectors)
covering a fixed cluster of polling stations;
• Patrolling duty as ‘flying squads’ in a defined area with
surprise element;
• Escorting duty of polled EVM with polling personnel back
to the receipt centre/strong room after polls are over;
• Any other work that is necessitated to ensure the purity and
fidelity of the election process.
38. What is the role of
CAPF on mobile
patrolling duties?
To ensure the fidelity of the election process moving from one
polling station to another and assist the sector officers to
accomplish it in a more effective manner.
39. The requirement of
security personnel
depends upon which
parameters?
It mainly depends on the guiding principles for deployment,
number of PSLs, law and order situation, expenditure
sensitivity, LWE/Insurgency/Militancy areas and phases of
election, vulnerability and criticality of the PS area.
40. Who will brief CAPF
personnel?
If the deployment is in a police station, the SHO shall brief.
If it is in a district, Superintendent of Police will brief CAPF
with respect to the challenges in the area, the appropriate
responses, do’s and don’ts etc.
41. Who assesses and
projects the
requirement of the
CAPF for the election
?
The CEO and the DGP after consultation with the districts
(as per threat perception), intelligence agencies assess the
availability of manpower in the state police and then
accordingly, carefully project the requirement of the CAPF to
the ECI.
9
42. Which information is
necessary to be
provided to CAPF for
route patrolling?
For mobile/route patrolling duty, the CAPF shall be provided
sector route maps (sketch) of each sector/route under their
charge. The sketch should indicate the polling station’s
locations, their sensitivity gradation, Name and contact no.
of Sector Officer /Assistant Returning Officer/ Returning
Officer / Observers etc.
43. In case of nonavailability of
sufficient CAPF, what
should be the
arrangement?
The local State Armed Police can also get deployed at polling
stations when enough CAPF is not available under the
specific instructions of the ECI through its Observers. In
such cases, the local police shall not stand at the entrance
door of the polling stations.
44. When is a
deployment plan
prepared?
A broad draft deployment plan should be prepared, before
announcement, at district level and collated at state level;
then it should be detailed at district level and finalized in
consultation with the senior most General/Police Observer
jointly.
45. Why is the State level
deployment plan
necessary?
Preparation of Deployment plans must not be left entirely to
the district machinery. For the purpose of standardization
and effective and optimal utilization of resources, it is
necessary for the State to prepare an overall State
Deployment Plan.
46. What are the main
factors which are
taken into account
while preparing the
state deployment
plan?
Main factors are: -
• Law and order situation in the state
• Phases of election and the corresponding movement plan.
• Vulnerability mapping
• Criticality of polling station
 Expenditure Sensitivity
• Assessment of availability of state police force/staff and
requirement of total force (CAPF) for election taking into
account the availability aspect.
47. Is Deployment plan
in LWE areas similar
to that of non-LWE
area?
No. No general standards can be drafted for LWE areas, as
the challenges are area specific. As such, an area specific
approach is required in LWE localities.
48. What is the minimum
strength of Central
Armed Police Force
(CAPF)/State Armed
Police Force (SAPF)
that can be deployed?
Central Armed Police Force (CAPF)/ State Armed Police Force
(SAPF) allotted by Ministry of Home Affairs; Govt. of India
should not be deployed below ½ Section strength. However,
State Reserve Police Force (SRPF) may be deployed as per the
deployment policy of the State concerned.
49. What are the
essential State Police
pre-poll deployment?
Besides the MCC teams there are:
Flying squads (FS)- There shall be three or more dedicated
flying squads under each assembly constituency/segment
for tracking cash transactions or any distribution of liquor or
any other items suspected of being used or bribing the voters.
Quick Response/Reaction Teams (QRTs)- Commandos
armed with sophisticated weapons, vehicles and
communication sets.
Static Surveillance Team (SST) – There shall be three or
more surveillance teams under each AC. This team shall put
check posts and keep watch on movement of large quantities
of cash, illegal liquor, any suspicious items or arms being
carried in their area.
50. Which are the means
of communication
Technological means such as landline phones, mobile
phones, wireless sets, satellite phones, internet, walky-talky
sets and non-technical means such as sector / zonal
10
that can be deployed
in elections?
magistrates, runners, motorcyclists / cyclists etc. can be
deployed in elections.
51. Who has to look after
to effectively equip
the police forces?
It shall be the duty of State Nodal Officer for law and order to
effectively equip the police forces. Before announcement of
election, the I.G. (Law & Order) shall look after this.
52. Which related
agencies are useful
for augmenting police
strength?
Social forestry guards; Home-guards, Gram Rakshak Dal,
NSS Volunteers; NCC Cadets, Custom and Central Exercise
Inspectors; Bus drivers of State Road Transport Corporation;
Industrial security force etc. can be useful.
53. How is the exigency
plan useful ?
It is useful in evacuation of wounded in case of an encounter,
replacement of Electronic Voting Machines in case of
destruction and reinforcement of forces in case of any
emergency etc.
54. Which plan shall
include geography,
terrain and weather
condition of the
district?
District Election Management Plan (under the head district
profile) should invariably include geography, terrain and
weather condition of the district.
55. What is the need of 6
months early posting
of an officer in LWE
areas?
If the officer in LWE areas posted 6 months prior to
imposition of MCC, he acquaints himself with domain, kind
of extremists outfits and friendly forces operating in that
area. This knowledge leads to better performance.
56. What are the special
needs of
Communication in
LWE areas?
In Maoist areas, communication is the lifeline, hence, it
should be accorded top priority. Shadow areas need satellite
communication. A joint command and control center
connected to the remotest polling booth also need to be
established.
Forces to be advised to carry sufficient number of
communication equipment.
57. What would be the
training pattern for
police officials likely
to be deployed in
election process?
Training to all officers/officials likely to be deployed in
election process will be conducted as per direction of ECI: -
At IIIDEM, New Delhi for SLMTs at State HQs for SPs and
Addl. SPs
At Divisional HQs/District HQs for Dy. SPs
At Range HQs for inspectors/SHOs/In-charge Police Lines.
At Thana level/Police Line level for police Mobile parties and
Police Personnel to be deputed in polling parties.
58. What would be the
main content of
training for police
officials?
The main contents of Training are1. Enforcement of MCC
2. Complaint monitoring system in the district.
3. Analysis of offence history of the polls.
4. Vulnerability mapping and identification of critical polling
station and critical clusters.
5. Misuse of money power in election.
6. Issues related to discipline during nomination process.
7. Issues that impact communal harmony.
8. Poll day (beginning from last 48 hours) and counting day
duties.
9. Coordination with the CAPF.
10. Training related to LWE and difficult areas.
59. What are the basic
amenities to be
provided to CAPF
Personnel?
Food, accommodation, transportation, communication
means (e.g. Sim card/recharge to Coy Commanders), route
maps etc. are to be provided.
11
60. Who will look into the
matter of CAPF
facilities?
State Nodal Officer (of the rank not below Inspector General
of Police in state Government) will look into the matter of
CAPF facilities like accommodation, logistic, welfare
measures, compensation, packed lunch etc.
61. Can service Electors
be enrolled in
Electoral Rolls at two
places –Service
Voters roll and as a
general elector?
No.
It is an offence under section 131 of Representative of
People’s Act 1950.
62. How can a member of
the security forces
become a service
voter?
Form 2 is to be filled by members of the armed forces of the
union. Form 2A is to be filled by State Armed Police who is
serving outside the state.
Fill the Form 2/2A and submit to the Record Office (for armed
forces of the Union) or nodal officer of your force appointed
for this purpose. On basis of the permanent residential
information given in the form, the Record Officer/
Commandant/Nodal Officer will send the signed and
stamped form online to DEO/ERO of concerned State.
63. What is a classified
service elector and
how can he vote?
Service electors who appoint a proxy to vote in place of
themselves are known as classified service elector. The proxy
can vote through Electronic Voting Machine by remaining
physically present at the Polling Station located at the native
place of the Service Elector in the same manner as any other
Elector assigned to that polling station record their votes.
64. Should Personal
Security Officer (PSO)
be provided to all the
Candidates
contesting the
elections?
No. The local police should carry out a threat assessment and
decide on deployment of Personal Security Officer (PSO)
based on the threat assessment.
65. Can the information
regarding the
number of companies
of Central Armed
Police Force (CAPF)/
State Armed Police
Force (SAPF) allotted
by Ministry of Home
Affairs, Govt. of India
for election purposes
be shared with media
and political parties?
No. The quantum of force and details of security deployment
plan should be kept confidential. However, a broad picture of
security arrangements made for free, fair and peaceful
elections may be shared with media as part of confidence
building measures (CBM).
66. Can the State/UT
going for elections
mobilize additional
police, Home Guard
(HG) from other
States directly
without prior
approval of Ministry
of Home Affairs,
Govt. of India?
Yes. The State/UT going for elections may mobilize additional
police, Home Guard (HG) from other States/UTs and intimate
the quantum of force mobilized to the Chief Electoral Officer
(CEO) so that the same is factored in while mobilizing Central
Armed Police Force (CAPF)/ State Armed Police Force (SAPF)
and finalizing scale of deployment.
12
LAW AND ORDER
S. No. Question Answer
67. Who initiate the
preventive law and
order
actions/measures?
The DEO and SP initiate the preventive measures such as
confidence building measures, area domination, visits to
vulnerable communities etc.
68. What is the
purpose of
launching Special
Drives?
Purpose of Special Drives:
• To compile lists of Persons indulged in electoral offences,
History sheeters, Absconders, Fugitive criminals, offences
under SC/ST Act, 1989.
• To monitor the pending warrants in police stations,
• To expedite the investigation and prosecution of all
electoral offences registered in previous elections
• Check on inter-State flow of illicit liquor,drugs,freebies etc.
• Seizure of unlicensed arms and ammunitions.
69. Is supply of liquor
allowed during poll
process?
No, Under Section 135 C of RP, Act, 1951, supply of liquor
is prohibited within a polling area during the period of 48
hours ending with the hour fixed for the closing of poll.
70. What are the
places where
supply of liquor is
prohibited during
period of 48 hours?
Any Hotel, eating house, tavern, shop or any other place,
private of public within a polling area.
71. Is supply of liquor
allowed during
counting process?
No, supply of liquor is prohibited on the day of counting also
and it is declared as DRY DAY.
72. Who is the
executive authority
to issue orders on
day of counting?
State Excise department issues comprehensive instructions
regarding Dry Day on day of counting (up to counting of
votes and declaration of result) using its appropriate powers
mentioning specific relevant rules/Acts.
73. Is carrying of
licensed arms
allowed during
election process?
No, Carrying of licensed arms is prohibited as soon as the
election is announced till declaration of results under
Section 144 of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
74. Can license for
arms be issued
during election
process?
No, issuance of license for arms is prohibited during the
period commencing from date of announcement of elections
till completion of such election.
75. Is it mandatory to
deposit the
licensed arms
during election?
No, only in cases where the District Magistrates consider
them essential to be impounded in order to ensure proper
law and order situation.
76. Is there any
Committee to
review the
deposited licensed
arms?
Yes, there will be a screening committee in every district and
Police Commissionerate.
77. Which authorities
are involved in the
Screening
Committee?
In District, Superintendent of Police and District Magistrate
form screening committee.
In Police Commissionerate, Commissioner of Police and
Joint/Additional Commissioner of Police(Administration)
form screening committee.
13
78. What is the
duration of this
Screening
Committee?
The Screening Committee starts functioning from the day of
announcement of elections and it shall finish its exercise
before issue of notification for such elections.
79. On receipt of report
from Screening
committee, when
should the
licensing authority
issue notice to
license holder for
depositing the
arms?
The licensing authority should issue notice to license holder
before last date of withdrawal of candidature for depositing
the arms.
80. Is there any
punishment in
case of not
depositing the
arms?
Yes, any license holder who fails to deposit the arms shall be
liable to prosecution under Section 188 of Indian Penal
Code.
81. Is the decision
taken by the
Screening
Committee final?
Yes
82. Who are exempted
from depositing the
arms?
Exempted by Screening committee and Sportsmen who are
member of National Rifle Association at different levels and
have to participate in various sporting events where they use
their rifles. Also those communities who are entitled to
display weapons by long standing law, custom and usage.
However, if any person from such communities is found
indulged in any violence or posing a threat to law and order
situation, their weapons will be impounded till one week
after declaration of results.
83. Is display of arms
in procession
allowed?
No, display of arms in procession in support of a candidate
during campaign period is not allowed under any
circumstances.
84. Is entry of persons
with Special
Security Cover
allowed in polling
station/counting
centre?
Yes, however only one Personal Security Officer with
concealed arms will accompany the protectee inside the
polling station and will locate himself to provide requisite
cover to protectee without interfering the process inside the
polling station.
85. Can someone carry
mobile phones,
smart phones etc.
inside the polling
station?
No, carrying of mobile phones, smart phones, smart watch,
wireless sets etc. inside the polling stations on day of poll
and is not allowed. However Presiding Officers are allowed to
carry their phones in silent mode for communication
purpose in case of exigency and necessity.
86. Can political
functionaries stay
in a constituency
after campaign
period is over?
Political functionaries/party workers/procession
functionaries/campaign functionaries etc. who have been
brought from outside the constituency and are not voters of
the constituency, should not continue to remain in the
constituency after the campaign period is over. However,
during G.E to Lok Sabha/State Legislative Assembly, this
restriction may not be insisted upon in respect of office
bearer of political party who is in charge of the State.
14
USE OF VEHICLES
S. No. Question Answer
87. Which provision
empowers the State
Government to
requisition premises or
any vehicle or vessel in
connection with
elections?
Section 160 of Representation of the People Act, 1951
empowers the State Government to requisition premises or
any vehicle or vessel in connection with elections. Section 160
to 167 of the said Act are related to such provisions.
88. What is the meaning of
Vehicle word in
context of elections?
“Vehicle” means any vehicle used or capable of being used for
the purpose of road transport whether propelled by
mechanical power or otherwise.
89. Can someone use
Official vehicle during
elections?
No, there is total and absolute ban on use of official vehicles
for campaigning, electioneering or election related travel
during elections.
90. Who are exempted
from these
restrictions?
 Prime Minister and other political personalities, who
might, in view of extremist and terrorist activities and
threat to their lives, require security of a high order.
 Hon’ble President and Vice President of India.
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha and Chairman of
Rajya Sabha( restrictions will be applicable during General
Election to Lok Sabha but not during Legislative Assembly
Election.)
91. Can someone use
vehicle from non-poll
going States/UTs to
poll going States/UTs?
No, this is also strictly prohibited as per the directions of the
Commissions.
92. Who shall ensure no
misuse of such
Vehicles?
Chief Secretary of each State/UT or Secretary to the Govt. of
India in the concerned Department or Ministry, as the case
may be.
93. Can Ministers of
Central Govt. or State
Govt. use such
vehicles for
campaigning or on
tours related to
elections?
No, this is totally prohibited and such vehicles cannot be used
even in guise of official work in their capacity as Ministers.
94. Is there any limit on
number of vehicles to
be used by a
Candidate?
No, however, the candidate has to furnish to District Election
Officer the details of vehicles such as: registration details,
fitness certificates, name and particulars of the owners and
drivers, areas where vehicle would be used for campaigning
purpose.
95. Is displaying original
copy of permit issued
by DEO mandatory on
wind screen of the
Vehicle?
Yes, only original copy of the permit issued by the DEO
(District Election officer) shall be displayed on the wind screen
of the Vehicle.
96. Who shall bear the
expenditure incurred
on use of vehicles for
campaigning or
electioneering purpose
by Candidates?
The expenditure incurred on use of such vehicles for
campaigning or electioneering purpose shall be booked in the
account of the respective Candidate.
15
97. What if someone use
such vehicles without
necessary permits?
Such vehicles shall be deemed un-authorized for
campaigning for the Candidate and may attract Penal
Provisions of Chapter IX A of the Indian Penal Code(offences
relating to elections) and shall therefore be immediately taken
out of the Campaigning exercise.
98. Who shall issue permit
for one vehicle to be
used by District Level
Officer bearer of a
recognized political
party(other than star
campaigner).
DEO issues such permit and an attested copy is to pasted on
the wind screen of the vehicle and original one is to be kept
by driver for checking by competent authorities, FSs, SST etc.
99. If any vehicle used by
Political party or
candidates or private
owner are found
involved in
transportation of antisocial elements,
smuggling of illicit
arms and ammunition
to create disturbances,
what will be the
consequences?
Such vehicles shall be impounded/seized by the local
administration and shall not be released them till the process
of elections is completed. Further, appropriate legal action
shall be taken against the owner, occupant and the
candidate/political party involved.
100. Who shall issue
permits for vehicles to
be used throughout
the State for use of
Officer bearers of
recognized political
parties for distribution
of campaign material?
Chief Electoral Officer on request of any recognized political
party may issue permit thereby granting permission for use
of number of vehicles equal to Number of ACs in the State
divided by 25 or Number of PCs in the State divided by 3 as
the case may be. These vehicles will not be used for election
campaigning in anyway. However, this is not applicable in
case of bye-elections.
101. Is there any restriction
on vehicles moving in
convoy?
Yes, not more than 10 vehicles in a convoy are allowed. In
case of road shows, convoy of vehicles will be broken after
every 10 vehicles with a gap of 100 meters.
102. How many vehicles are
allowed during filling
of nominations?
Maximum 3(three) vehicles are allowed to come within the
periphery of 100 meters of officers of RO/ARO.
103. Is providing free
conveyance to the
voters on day of poll by
a candidate/his agent
through vehicles hired
or procured by them
allowed?
No, this is treated as Corrupt Practice and also an electoral
offence punishable under Section 133 of RP, Act, 1951.
104. How many vehicles are
entitled to each
contesting candidate
on day of poll during
elections?
During Lok Sabha:
 One vehicle for his own use in respect of entire PC
 One vehicle for use of his election agent in respect of
PC
 One vehicle for use of his election agent/workers or
party workers in every AC segment comprised in the
PC
During State Legislative Assembly:
 One vehicle for his own use
16
 One vehicle for use of his election agent in respect of
AC
 One vehicle for use of his election agent/workers
RO issues permits for such vehicles and no other vehicles
are allowed to be used by leaders of Political parties
including Ministers, workers, agents etc.
105. Is there any ban on use
of vehicles by Public on
day of Poll?
No, use of vehicles by Public on day of poll is allowed provided
that they are not connected with conduct of elections in
anyway and does not flout any direction/instruction issued
by the Commission governing use of vehicles.
106. Who shall issue permit
for use of vehicles not
propelled by
mechanical power?
RO issues such permits after receiving details of such
vehicles by Candidates and if such vehicles do not have any
municipal registration/permit for its identification, RO will
issue permit in name of driver/owner.
107. Can someone display
of flags, stickers,
posters on commercial
vehicles for election
campaign?
No, unless such vehicles are being used validly after
obtaining requisite permit from competent/specified
authority.
17
HONORARIUM, REMUNERATION AND TA/DA
S. No. Question Answer
108. Who are beneficiaries
for payment of
honorarium?
 DEOs/ROs/AROs/ Election Staff (to be decided by
State Govt. in consultation with concerned CEO)
 Gazetted and Subordinate Officers of CAPF
 Assistant Expenditure Observer/Sector
Officer/Sector Police Officer
109. Can payment of
honorarium be less
than basic pay of one
month of concerned
employee?
No
110. Can payment of
honorarium be paid to
personnel in bye
elections?
No, it is applicable to only General Elections held to
Parliament and State Assemblies.
111. Who will decide the
categories of staff for
payment of
honorarium?
State Government will decide the categories of staff for
payment of honorarium in consultation with CEO concerned.
112. Will TA/DA be paid in
addition to payment of
honorarium?
Yes. As per Commissions instruction available on the
Commissions website at URL
https://eci.gov.in/files/file/15081-payment-ofremuneration-and-tada-to-personnel-deployed-for-electionrelated-duties-regarding
113. Who will pay amount of
TA/DA?
Parent department of the polling/police personnel and other
personnel deployed for election related duties.
 114. Who bears the
expenditure incurred
due to payment of
honorarium?
• By Government of India during elections to Lok Sabha;
• By the State Government during election to Legislative
Assemblies and;
• Shared on a 50:50 basis during simultaneous election to
Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly by the Government of
India and concerned State Governments.
115. Is payment of
remuneration
applicable to CAPFs?
No, only honorarium is paid to CAPFs.
116. What is remuneration? Remuneration is minimum amount payable to personnel for
attending training sessions, collecting polling material and
for performing duty on polling day/counting day. This
instruction is also applicable to police personnel who are
called for training and actually deployed on election related
duties on polling/counting centers on the same criteria as
being paid to the polling/counting personnel.
117. Are polling/counting
personnel on reserve
duty to be paid
remuneration?
Yes, as per the rates fixed for personnel on actual duty.
118. For which elections
remuneration is paid?
Both General and Bye-elections.
119. Is amount of
remuneration different
for polling personnel
going to difficult terrain
where polling parties
Yes, it is different for these personnel and it is double than
normal rates.
18
depart 3 days or more
in advance?
120. Are the rates fixed by
the Commission final?
No, these are the minimum rates, States/UTs can pay higher
amount than the minimum rates fixed by the Commission.
121. Is there any employee,
other than mentioned
in the instruction
issued by the
Commission on
remuneration, who is
eligible for
remuneration?
Yes, there can be other officials related to conduct of elections
included by State Government as deemed fit under this
provision.
122. Is packed lunch and/or
light refreshment
included in payment of
remuneration?
No, it is to be provided in addition to remuneration.
123. Who can receive
packed lunch and/or
light refreshment?
Polling personnel including police personnel, personnel in
mobile parties, Home Guards, Forest Guards, Gram Rakshak
Dal, NCC cadets, ex-Servicemen, volunteers etc. deployed at
all polling stations/counting centres for election related
work.
124. For which election
amount of TA/DA is
paid?
Both General and Bye-elections.
125. What is the
Commission’s Policy
with regard to TA/DA?
The Commission has issued instruction regarding payment
of TA/DA and the same can be seen on the Commission’s
website at URL https://eci.gov.in/files/file/15081-paymentof-remuneration-and-tada-to-personnel-deployed-forelection-related-duties-regarding.
126. If, after receipt of
advance amount, any
official, for any reason
whatsoever, does not
find it possible to
perform the official
duty assigned to him,
shall he return the
amount so paid and
obtain a receipt
therefore?
Yes.
127. Who shall bear the
expenditure incurred
due to payment of
remuneration and
food/refreshment?
• Government of India during elections to Lok Sabha;
• The State Government during election to Legislative
Assemblies and;
• Shared on a 50:50 basis during simultaneous election to
Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly between the
Government of India and concerned State Governments.
128. Is remuneration paid to
Sector officer as per
new instructions?
No, only honorarium is paid to Sector Officer as per new
instructions.
129. Is Sector Police Officer
paid payment of
honorarium?
Yes, an amount of 7500 Rs/- for full-time election duty or on
pro rata basis proportional to the duration of duty.
19
WELFARE MEASURES FOR POLLING PERSONNEL
S. No. Question Answer
130. What are the welfare measures
for Polling Personnel?
Arrangements for a dedicated 24x7 Helpline
number, health care/first aid assistance,
deployment of ambulance with medical /paramedical staff, arrangements of basic amenities
such as drinking water, washrooms, help desk,
Learning Desk, Proper layout, Signage boards,
functional public address system, vehicle parking,
food/ refreshments, delivery of Election materials
in consolidated modular or packaged form,
approved backpacks to carry EVMs/VVPATs in
difficult terrains, special arrangements for
conveyance for women and PwD staff, basic
amenities at Intermediate EVM Strong Rooms,
Assured Minimum Facilities (AMF) in Polling
stations, proper arrangements for stay of polling
staff and food, availability of Air Ambulances and
cashless treatment for polling staff.
20
WELFARE MEASURES FOR VOTERS
S.No. Question Answer
131. What is Voter Information
Slip (VIS)?
In order to facilitate the voters to know about their
polling stations, a slip containing voter’s details,
polling station location with map, date and time of
poll, crucial do’s and don’ts is given to the voter.
VIS also has a QR code printed on it for faster
searching/matching of the elector’s details.
132. Who is responsible for
distribution of VIS to
voters?
The distribution of VIS is done by BLOs under
supervision of RO, DEO and General Observer
concerned.
133. When VIS is distributed to
voters?
VIS is distributed to voters from last date of making
Nominations till 5 clear days from the date of poll.
134. Is bulk distribution of VIS
allowed?
No.
135. What happens to the
undistributed VIS?
All undistributed VIS are returned by the BLO to
concerned RO/ARO, who shall keep the same in
the sealed cover under safe custody. No further
distribution of VIS would be done after the same
are returned to the RO.
136. What is Accessible Voter
Information Slip (AVIS)?
As per Commission’s directions, Accessible Voter
Information Slip (AVIS) with Braille Features is
issued to voters with Visual Impairment or Blind,
over and above normal Voter Information Slip (VIS)
137. What are the Assured
Minimum Facilities (AMF)?
To provide assistance and facilitation to voters to
enable them to cast their vote on the day of poll in
smooth, hassle-free and convenient manner, the
Commission has directed the CEO and DEO to
ensure the following Assured Minimum Facilities at
each and every polling station/location1. Polling Station should be on the ground floor
to facilitate voting for aged and disabled
electors and should have separate entrance
and exit for voters;
2. A permanent ramp of maximum gradient
1:12 should be provided at all polling
stations to facilitate PwD voters and senior
citizens;
3. Provision for drinking water should be
made;
4. There should be provision for adequate
furniture inside the Polling Station for
polling parties and polling agents;
5. Proper electricity/lighting arrangements
should be made inside the polling stations,
however halogen lamps or 200 watt bulbs
should not be installed directly above or in
front of voting compartment.
138. Where should a Polling
Station be set up?
A polling Station should be set up at such a place
that ordinarily, no voter is required to travel more
than 2 kilometers to cast his/her vote, however, in
sparsely populated hilly or forest area, this rule
may be relaxed.
21
139. Does ECI provide any
special facilities for women
electors?
As per ECI’s directions, a separate queue for
women is to be arranged at every polling station.
Pregnant women and women with babies in arms
are given priority. If number of female voters,
especially, pardanashin women is large at a polling
station, lady polling officers are appointed,
moreover, “All Women Manged” polling stations are
also set up, to promote/enhance women
participation. Crèche facility is also provided at
polling station.
140. What are the other
facilities available at
Polling Stations?
In case of any need, basic medical kits are available
at polling stations. Volunteers from
NCC/NSS/Scouts and Guides are also appointed
to help voters, manage long queues etc. For senior
citizens and PwD voters, wheel chairs and
transport facility are also arranged. Arrangement
of mobile medical van is also done to tackle any
medical emergency.
141. How many queues are
allowed at the polling
stations?
For better facilitation of voters, the Commission
has directed to arrange three queues at polling
station i.e. one for male voters, one for female
voters and one for senior citizens & PwD voters.
22
EX-GRATIA
S. No. Question Answer
142. What is ex-gratia? Ex-gratia is an amount which is paid in case any
personnel deployed for election related duties
sustain grievous injuries or die while performing his
duties.
143. What is the election duty
period?
From date of announcement of election till
declaration of result(both dates are inclusive)
144. Who are eligible for ex-gratia? All personnel deployed for all types of election
related duties, election observers, all security
personnel under CAPFs, SAPs, State Police, Home
Guards, any private person like drivers, cleaners
etc. hired for election duty, BEL/ECIL engineers
engaged in First Level Checking(FLC), EVM
Commissioning, poll day and counting day duty.
145. When is a person considered
on election duty?
As soon he/she leaves his/her residence/office to
report for any election related work including
training and till he/she reaches to his/her
residence/office after performing election duty. If
there is a mishap during this period, it should be
treated as having occurred on election duty provided
that there should be a causal connection between
occurrence of death/injury and election duty.
146. What is the election duty
period for BEL/ECIL
engineers?
Period of FLC duty and duration for which official is
deputed for Commissioning, poll/counting
arrangement is treated as election duty period.
147. What if a person dies of COVID
while performing election
duty?
He/she will be eligible for ex-gratia compensation as
per the rates fixed by the Commission in case of
death due to COVID provided that there should be
a cogent connection between election duty and
contracting COVID during election duty with a
COVID report within 15 days of completion of
election duty and a medical certificate of death from
a hospital mentioning that the death occurred due
to COVID.
148. What are rates for ex-gratia
compensation?
The amount of compensation would be:
I. Rs.30 Lakhs if the death is caused due to
any violent acts and COVID-19.
II. Rs.15 Lakhs in the event of death by any
other reason other than mentioned above in
point no(i).
III. Rs.15 Lakhs in case of permanent disability
Rs.7.5 Lakhs in case of grievous injury
149. If someone gets ex-gratia
compensation, is he/she
eligible for any other
compensation from other
concerned?
Yes, Payment of ex-gratia compensation will be in
addition to the compensation already being paid by
the MHA under its extant guidelines and any other
compensation paid by the State Government or any
employer.
150. Is ex-gratia compensation
applicable in all elections?
Yes, Payment of ex-gratia compensation will be
applicable to Parliamentary/ Assembly/Bye
elections and for elections of Legislative Councils,
President and Vice-President of India.
23
151. Is there any other facility for
personnel who get injured or
fall sick during election duty?
Yes, Cashless Treatment facility has been provided
by the Commission for all such personnel involved
in elections who get injured or fall sick while on
duty.
152. Who shall born the
expenditure incurred due to
ex-gratia compensation?
 By Government of India during elections to
Lok Sabha, Vice President and President of
India
 By the State Government during election to
Legislative Assemblies and Legislative
Council
 50:50 basis between Govt. of India and
concerned State Govt. during simultaneous
election to Lok Sabha and Legislative
Assembly.
24
STATUTORY AND NON-STATUTORY FORMS
S.No. Question Answer
153. Which are the Statutory
Forms/Formats used
during polling process at
the Polling Stations?
Statutory:
 Register of voters, Form 17A
 Account of votes recorded, Form-17C
 Tendered ballot papers and the list in Form 17-B
 List of blind and infirm electors in Form 14-A
 List of challenged votes in Form 14
 Voter’s Slip
154. Which are the NonStatutory Forms/Formats
used during polling
process at the Polling
Stations?
Non-Statutory:
 Declarations by the presiding officer
 Presiding Officers Diary
 Visit Sheet
 Presiding Officers Report (I,II,III, IV & V)
 Receipt of Return of election records and material after
poll (form M21)
 Polling/Relieving agent movement sheet
 Entry Pass of Polling/Relieving agent
 Declaration by Companion of blind and infirm voters
 Receipt book and cash, if any, in respect of challenged
votes;
 declaration by elector under Rule 49MA(Test Vote)
 Form of declaration by elector whose name is in ASD
list;
 Letter of complaint to the S.H.O. Police;
 Declaration by elector about his age
List of elector who voter after giving declaration/refused
to give declaration
155. What are the type of
envelopes used during
polling process?
A total of six types of packets containing various
envelopes for statutory and non-statutory forms and
formats and other items are used during polling
process. Details may be seen below
First packet: EVM Papers
Second packet: Scrutiny Cover
Third packet: Statutory Cover
Fourth packet: Non-Statutory Cover
Fifth packet: Handbook, Instructions and other
Sixth Packet: Other Materials
156. What does the first packet
consist of ?
First packet: EVM Papers
 Unsealed envelope containing the account of
votes recorded (Form-17C),
 Unsealed envelope containing the Presiding
Officer Report I (Mock-Poll Certificate), II & III
 Printed VVPAT paper slips of Mock Poll should
be kept in Black Coloured Sealed Envelope
In case of simultaneous election, separate first packet
of EVM Papers in pink colour for polled EVM for
assembly poll.
157. What does the second
packet consist of ?
Second packet: Scrutiny Cover
25
 Unsealed envelope containing the Presiding
Officer’s Diary
 Sealed envelope containing the register of
voters (17A)
 Unsealed envelope containing Visit Sheet
 Unsealed envelope containing the list of blind
and infirm electors in Form 14-A and the
declarations of the companions
158. What does the third
packet consist of ?
Third packet: Statutory Cover
 Sealed envelope containing the marked copy of
the electoral roll and list of CSVs, if any;
 Sealed envelope containing voter’s slips;
 Sealed envelope containing unused tendered
ballot papers;
 Sealed envelope containing the used tendered
ballot papers and the list in Form 17-B;
 Sealed envelope containing the list of
challenged votes in Form 14;
In case of simultaneous election, pink envelope
containing the pink voter’s slip for assembly poll should
be kept in this third packet.
159. What does the fourth
packet consist of ?
Fourth packet: Non-Statutory Cover
 Unsealed envelope containing the copy or
copies of electoral roll (other than the marked
copy);
 Unsealed envelope containing the appointment
letters of Polling Agents in Form 10 and
accounts of appointment of polling agent;
 Unsealed envelope containing the election duty
certificate in Form 12-B
 Unsealed envelope containing the declarations
by the presiding officer
 Unsealed envelope containing the receipt book
and cash, if any, in respect of challenged votes;
 Unsealed envelope containing
 unused and damaged paper seals and
 unused and damaged special tags;
 Unsealed envelope of unused voter’s slip
 For the declarations obtained from electors as
to their age and the list of electors who have
refused to make declarations as to their age
 Form of declaration by elector under Rule 49M
(Test Vote);
 Form of declaration by elector whose name is
in ASD list;
 Letter of complaint to the S.H.O. Police;
In case of simultaneous election, pink envelope
containing the declaration by the presiding officer
should be kept in this fourth pocket.
160. What does the fifth packet
consist of ?
Fifth packet: Handbook, Instructions and other
 Hand Book for Presiding Officer;
26
 Instructions of Electronic Voting Machine &
VVPAT,
a) Posters on How to cast vote on EVM and VVPAT,
b) Brochure for Presiding Officer on use of EVM and
VVPAT and
c) Trouble shooting on use of EVM and VVPAT;
 Sealed envelope containing,
a) Indelible ink set with stopper having been secured on
each phial effectively with molten candle or wax
applied thereon to prevent leakage or evaporation and
b) used self-inking pads)
161. What does the sixth packet
consist of ?
Sixth Packet: Other Materials
 List of contesting candidates Form 7A
 Photocopy of signature of candidates
 Other unused forms.
 Metal seal of the Presiding Officer;
 Arrow cross-mark rubber stamp for marking
tendered ballot papers;
 Cup for setting the indelible ink
Two stationery containers containing used and
remaining stationery items.
27
NON-CAPF MEASURES
S.No. Question Answer
162. What are Civil (Non- force)
Measures deployed during
election process?
The Polling Stations, where CAPF is not deployed,
the following civil (non-force) measures are put in
place to ensure free and fair election:
(i) Micro Observer
(ii) Videography
(iii) CCTV
(iv) Webcasting
163. Whether Civil Measures
are arranged only for the
day of poll?
Certain civil measures are not restricted to poll day
only but extended to cover all other critical poll
processes. For example, videography of various
events during election process, videography team
deployed with FST SST etc.
164. What is the role of Micro
Observers during poll?
Generally, Micro-Observers are appointed on
critical polling stations as an additional civil
measure. Micro Observers are not supposed to
interfere in the polling process. They prepare report
on the basis of their observation and submit the
same to Observer at the end of the poll day.
165. What is the role of Micro
Observers during
counting?
During Counting, Micro-Observers are appointed
on every Counting table to keep close watch on
Counting Process and also assist Observer during
counting process.
166. Can Micro Observer be
deployed at Polling Station
location having multiple
Polling Stations ?
In a polling station location having more than one
critical polling station, the Micro Observer shall be
responsible for all the critical Polling Stations at
that location.
167. To whom the Micro
Observer shall report ?
Micro Observers shall report to the Observer alone
and not to other election officials.
168. What is the videography
cover at polling station?
The videography team at a polling station location
cover events related to attempts of intimidation of
voters, attempts of inducement/ bribing of voters,
canvassing within 100 metres of Polling Stations,
positioning of voting compartment (without
violation of secrecy of voting), Assured Minimum
Facilities (AMF) at the Polling Station, presence of
polling agents, Mock Poll, clearing of Mock Poll,
sealing of EVMs and VVPATs, process of
identification of voters, voters in queues, the length
of queues at the time fixed for close of poll, any
dispute of any nature at the Polling Station, visit by
Sector Officers, Observers and other electoral
functionaries or any important person including
the candidates, replacement of EVMs/VVPATs, if
any, any reportable or objectionable incident, any
other process or event specified by DEO/RO.
169. What is webcasting? Webcasting at a polling station means live
streaming of events inside the polling station
(without violation of secrecy of voting) for
monitoring by the election machinery only to
prevent vitiation of poll process.
28
170. Who can watch the
webcasting live streaming?
Live stream of webcasting on poll day events is only
displayed at Control Rooms of Chief Electoral
Officer, District Election Officer and Returning
Officer and nowhere else.
171. How are the Polling
Stations for webcasting
identified?
Webcasting is done in all critical Polling Stations
and all Polling Stations in vulnerable areas or at
least in 50% of total Polling Stations including
auxiliary Polling Stations, whichever is higher.
172. Is CCTV facility used
during election process?
Yes. CCTV facility is used for the poll processes,
scheduled/happening inside rooms/halls, like
nomination, scrutiny, withdrawal, symbol
allotment, EVM/VVPAT related processes like FLC,
Commissioning, Preparation of EVMs etc.
29
GENERAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR POLL
S. No. Question Answer
173. During preparation of
Elections, various
activities like manpower
management, training,
transport etc. at district
level are conducted. Who
is responsible for all these
activities?
At district level, District Election Officer is overall incharge for all election related activities. For smooth
conduct of all activities and their timely completion,
16 dedicated Nodal Officers are appointed in the
district for the following activities1.Manpower Management,
2.Training Management,
3.Material Management,
4.Transport Management,
5.Computerization, Cyber Security and IT,
6.SVEEP,
7.Law & Order, Vulnerability Mapping & Security
Plan,
8.EVM Management,
9.MCC,
10.Expenditure Monitoring,
11.Ballot Papers, Postal Ballot & ETPBS,
12.Media,
13.Communication plan,
14.Electoral Rolls,
15.Complaints Redressal and Voter Helpline,
16.Observers.
174. Are any Nodal Officers
appointed at State Level?
Yes, State Level Nodal Offices are appointed for
various important activities like EVM, SVEEP, MCC,
Media, Complaint Redressal etc.
175. Who is the controlling
authority for the Nodal
Officers appointed at
State Level?
The Chief Electoral Officer of the State is the
controlling authority for the Nodal Officers
appointed at State Level.
176. Can Candidates set up
any booth for voter’s
facilitation on the day of
poll?
Yes. Each Candidate can set up one Election Booth
outside 200 meter periphery of the Polling Station
Premises and distribute unofficial identity slips to
the voters.
177. If an elector is not aware
about the voting
procedure through EVM,
is there any facility to help
him?
Yes. The presiding officer is provided with Dummy
Ballot Unit with dummy symbols to educate the
voter. Moreover, a voter facilitation poster on “How
to Vote” is also displayed near the entrance of the
polling station.
178. Who can enter inside the
polling station?
Following persons can enter into the polling
station:-
a) Polling officers
b) Candidate, his election agent and one polling
agent at a time
c) The electors
d) Persons authorised by the Commission
e) Public servants on duty in connection with
election
f) A child in arms
g) A person accompanying a blind or an infirm voter
h) Such other persons as the presiding officer may
allow for the purpose of identifying voters
30
179. Can security personnel
accompanying any
candidate enter the
polling station?
No. Only security personnel of SPG and Z+ protectee
can enter the polling station in plain clothes and
arms kept in concealed manner.
180. How can a voter in ASD
list vote?
If any Voter in ASD list arrives for voting, the
Presiding Officer shall verify the prescribed
identification document personally. If Presiding
Officer is satisfied that the elector is genuine after
verification, the Presiding Officer shall obtain a
declaration from such elector and certify therein.
181. If an elector comes to vote
and finds that his/her
vote has already been
cast, what happens?
In such case, if the Presiding Officer is satisfied
about the identity of such person to be the real voter
after necessary questioning, such elector shall be
permitted to vote only by means of a “Tendered
Ballot Paper” (Not by means of the voting machine).
182. If Polling Agent of a
candidate raise doubts
over identity of an elector
during polling process,
what happens?
If any polling agents challenges the identity of a
person claiming to be a particular elector, he has to
deposit a sum of Rs.2 in cash with the Presiding
Officer for each challenge. The Presiding Officer
shall hold a summary inquiry into the challenge. If,
after the inquiry, the Presiding Officer considers
that the challenge has not been established, he shall
allow the challenged person to vote. If he considers
that the challenge has been established, the
Presiding Officer shall debar the challenged person
from voting and shall handover such person to the
police with a written complaint.
183. If a voter comes to vote,
put his/her signature in
register of voters and
decides not to vote, what
happens?
In such cases, if an elector after signing in Register
of Voters (Form 17A) wishes to leave without voting,
a remark can be made in the Form 17A according to
the situation/circumstances under which the
elector is not voting like “left without voting” or
“refused to vote” etc.
184. What are the reports
prepared on the day of
poll?
Generally, Presiding Officer is required to send % of
polling at 9 AM, 11 AM, 1 PM, 3 PM and 5 PM on
Poll Day. Apart from this various other reports like
Mock Poll certificate, Micro Observer’s report, PrO’s
diary, poll completion report etc. are prepared.
185. What are the other
arrangements done on
the day of poll?
For smooth conduct of poll, the DEO and RO make
the following arrangements in advance: -
1. Deployment of sufficient force in vulnerable areas
and keep reserve force to tackle any Law and Order
situation;
2. All necessary facilities for voters at polling
booth like drinking water, proper queue
management, shade, transport for elderly and PwD
voters etc.
3. Reserve EVMs and VVPATs in case of the
deployed one becomes non-functioning.
4. Arrangements for food etc. for officials on
duty.
5. Deployment of CPAF, State Police and Civil
Measures at polling stations.
6. Any other special arrangement required to
be made.
31
186. Can a voter carry mobile
phone inside the polling
station?
No.
Voters are not allowed to carry mobile phone inside
the polling station.
187. What are the
arrangements made at
dispatch/ receiving
centre?
Generally, vehicles with numbers (allotted to the
parties) are arranged serially so that they are easily
traceable. Similarly, dispatch/ receiving counters
are marked properly. As per Commission’s
instructions, general amenities for drinking water,
washrooms, parking, food/refreshments etc. are
also arranged.
188. After poll, how are the
polled EVMs-VVPATs and
Other important papers
stored?
After poll, the Polled EVMs & VVPATs, NonFunctional Polled EVMs & VVPATs, Unsealed
envelope containing account of votes, Unsealed
envelope containing presiding officer report I, II &
III, Printed paper slips of mock poll (sealed in black
Envelope) are stored separately in “Polled EVM
Strong Room”.
32
POLLING AGENTS
S.No. Question Answer
189. Who is qualified
to be a polling
agent?
A local person who is an elector and ordinary resident of the
same or, at most, neighbouring Polling Station is appointed
as Polling Agent. In case of any difficulty to appoint Polling
Agents as above, from amongst any elector of the same
Assembly Constituency area can also be appointed. There is
no restriction on appointing Gram Panchayat
Pradhan/Gram Panchayat Sarpanch/Panchayat members,
Councillors or Members of Municipal Corporation or
Municipality and local persons, as Polling Agents.
190. Who cannot be a
polling agent?
The following persons are not allowed to become Polling
Agent1. Sitting Minister either of Union Government or of a State
Government, Member of Parliament, Member of Legislative
Assembly, Legislative Council.
2. Mayor of a Corporation or Chairperson of
Municipality/Zila Parishad/Panchayat Union, etc.
3. Chairpersons and Members of Central PSUs/State PSUs,
Govt. Bodies/Corporation.
4. Persons receiving any honorarium from Government or
Persons working on part time in any Govt./ Govt. Aided
Institutions.
5. Para Medical/Healthcare staff working in Govt./Govt.
Aided institutions, Fair Price Shop dealers, Anganwadi
Employees.
6. Person in the service of the Government
7. Any person having security cover will not be allowed to
surrender his security cover to act as such Polling Agent
191. Can
appointment of a
polling agent be
revoked?
Yes. The candidate or his Election Agent can also revoke the
appointment of a Polling Agent by filling Form-11 (Conduct
of Elections Rules 1961). If the appointment of any Polling
Agent is revoked or if any Polling Agent dies before the close
of the poll, the candidate or his/her Election Agent can
appoint another Polling Agent at any time before the poll is
over.
192. Is Polling Agent
allowed to carry
his/her copy of
electoral roll
outside the
Polling Station?
No. Under no circumstances, the polling agent should be
allowed to bring his/her copy of the electoral roll outside the
polling station, either by himself or through the relieving
agent, during the course of the polling and till the polling is
closed.
193. What is the
seating order of
priority of Polling
Agents in a
Polling Station ?
The seating order of priority of polling agents in the Polling
Stations shall be as under:
1. Candidates of recognized National parties,
2. Candidates of recognized State parties,
3. Candidates of recognized State parties of other States who
have been permitted to use their reserved symbols in the
constituency,
4. Candidate of registered unrecognized parties, and
5. Independent candidates.
194. What are the
processes
witnessed by the
Polling Agents witness in the following processes on poll
day:-
1. Mock poll process
33
Polling Agents on
poll day?
2. Clearing the mock poll data from control unit and VVPAT
slips from VVPAT.
3. Sealing process after mock poll
4. Identification and Polling by those electors who are
enrolled in elector roll.
5. Prevention of impersonation of voters
6. Secrecy of voting
7. Un-authorized person access, if any.
8. Replacement of Ballot unit(s), Control unit(s) and
VVPAT(s) during mock poll and
during actual poll.
9. Document preparation as per Law and Rules.
10. Webcasting/ Videography/CCTV, if done at that polling
station.
11. Micro observer presence, if appointed for that polling
station.
12. Rule 49 MA cases.
13. Tendered votes
14. Queue of Electors who are present at end of poll time
fixed by ECI.
15. Removal of VVPAT power pack after poll is over.
16. Sealing after closing the poll.
17. Security available at polling station.
18. Complaint by any other polling agent(s).
19. Vigil on movement of EVM-VVPATs after poll from polling
station to EVM-VVPAT strong room and deposit of the
machines as well as all documents.
20. Any other important event.
195. What materials
can polling agent
bring to the
polling booth?
Polling Agent can bring the following items to the polling
booth1. Original Letter of appointment in Form -10 (mandatory);
2. A copy of the latest integrated electoral roll for the Polling
Station.
3. A small brass seal, if he/she desires to put seal on the
carrying case(s) of the Ballot Units(s), Control Unit and
VVPAT before they are transported to the Counting/Receipt
Centre;
4. Pen, paper and pencil;
5. Details of EVM (Control and Ballot units) and VVPAT to
be used in the polling station as provided by the Returning
Officer and/or by the Candidate.
34
COUNTING
S.No. Question Answer
196. What are the
arrangements
made for the day of
Counting?
The polled EVMs and VVPATs are put under strict security
in designated strong rooms and these strong rooms are
opened on the day of counting in the presence of
Candidates/their Agents. The DEO/RO makes all required
arrangements for the day of counting of votes like
arrangements for counting tables (EVM and Postal Ballot
both), sitting arrangements for candidates/counting
agents, deployment for proper staff (counting officials and
micro observers) at counting tables, RO table, with
Observer etc. arrangements for media room, control room,
VCB, proper security etc.
197. Who can be
appointed as
Counting agent?
The law does not prescribe any qualification for person to
be appointed as a Counting Agent. However, the
Candidates may appoint persons of the age of 18 years and
above as their Counting Agents so that they are
appropriately represented during Counting of Votes.
 198. Who cannot be
appointed as
Counting Agent?
The following persons are not allowed to become Counting
Agent1. Sitting Minister either of Union Government or of a State
Government, Member of Parliament, Member of Legislative
Assembly, Legislative Council.
2. Mayor of a Corporation or Chairperson of
Municipality/Zila Parishad/Panchayat Union etc.
3. Chairpersons and Members of Central PSUs/State PSUs,
Govt. Bodies/Corporation.
4. Persons receiving any honorarium from Government or
Persons working on part time in any Govt./ Govt. Aided
Institutions.
5. Para Medical/Healthcare staff working in Govt./Govt.
Aided institutions, Fair Price Shop dealers, Anganwadi
Employees.
6. Person in the service of the Government
7. Any person having security cover will not be allowed to
surrender his security cover to act as such Counting Agent
199. Who is allowed to
enter the Counting
Centre?
The following persons are allowed inside the Counting
Center:-
a) Counting supervisors and Counting Assistants, MicroObservers;
b) Persons authorized by ECI (possessing authority letter
duly issued by ECI), and Observers,
c) Public servants on duty in connection with the election;
and
d) Candidates, their Election Agents and Counting agents.
200. Is there any
arrangement for
media persons at
Counting center?
Yes.
At some distance away from the main counting hall in each
counting Center, a media center is set up for use by the
authorised media personnel with all reasonable facilities
like telephone, fax, computer with printer and internet
facility etc.
201. Where is a
counting center
set up?
So far as practicable, government buildings other than
colleges/ educational institutions are requisitioned keeping
in view the suitability to establish Counting Centre. Care
35
should be taken while selecting the Counting Centres and
Strong Rooms so that there are minimal disruptions to the
educational activities and other societal interests. Creation
of permanent Strong Rooms in such colleges /institutions
should be done as a last resort.
202. What are the
security
arrangements
made around
counting center?
Three-tier cordoning system is set up in all counting
premises to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons
inside the counting premises.
1st tier of security ring shall start from 100-meter
periphery around the Counting premise/campus, which
should be demarcated as pedestrian zone.
The 2nd tier and the middle cordon will be at the gate of
the counting premises. This will be manned by the State
Armed Police of the State concerned. Before allowing the
entry of persons into the 2nd cordon, proper frisking
should be done by the State Police Personnel to ensure that
no prohibited items like matchbox, arms and other
inflammable articles etc. are carried inside.
The 3rd tier and the innermost cordon shall be at the door
of the Counting Hall. This will be manned by Central Armed
Police Forces (CAPF). There will be proper frisking
arrangements at this stage too so as to ensure that no
mobile phones and other prohibited items are carried
inside the Counting Hall.
203. How is the
Counting of Votes
done?
The counting of Postal Ballot papers is started 30 minutes
prior to the Counting of votes through Control Units.
Generally, the Counting of one AC/AS is done in one
counting hall. For every 500 postal Ballots, one table is
arranged. For counting through CUs, normally 14 tables
are arranged and polling station wise CUs are brought to
the tables. Once counting of all 14 CUs is completed on all
respective tables, CUs are removed from tables and result
sheets are prepared, one round is considered completed.
Similarly, counting of another round is done till the
completion of counting of all CUs. Counting of VVPAT paper
slips is done in the last as per the prescribed protocol.
Result is announced officially after completion of counting
process.
204. When is the
Counting of Votes
done?
Counting of Votes is done after completion of Polling in all
Phases, as per the schedule announced by the ECI.
205. What does the
Counting of votes
include?
Counting of Votes is done for vote cast by the Voters on
EVM-VVPAT system and through Postal Ballots received by
the RO as per prescribed procedure.
206. Who is in-charge
for Counting of
Votes?
Counting of votes is to be done by Returning Officer.
Assistant Returning Officers are also legally empowered to
supervise counting of votes. If the Returning Officer has
been assigned more than one Parliamentary or Assembly
Constituency, his/her Assistant Returning Officers can
take up the counting of an Assembly segment separately.
207. How many tables
are arranged for
Counting of votes?
Generally, total 14 tables are arranged for Counting of
Votes through EVM (i.e.CU counting). Apart from this,
arrangement of one table for each 500 Postal Ballot is also
made.
36
208. Are
representatives of
candidates
allowed to watch
Counting
procedure?
Yes. Every candidate is allowed to appoint one Counting
Agent for each table (including tables for Postal Ballots) and
one more Agent for RO’s table.
209. How many
counting officials
are appointed at
one counting
table?
For each EVM counting table, 4 officials are appointed
1. One Counting Supervisor
2. One Counting Assistant
3. Counting staff from MTS/Group D employees; and
4. One Micro Observer
For each table of counting of Postal Ballots, 5 officials are
appointed1. One Assistant Returning Officer
2. One Counting Supervisor
3. Two Counting Assistants
4. One Micro Observer
210. How are the
Counting officials
appointed?
Counting Officials are appointed through 3 stages of
randomization. The final randomization (i.e. allocation of
counting tables) is done on the day of Counting itself before
commencement of counting in the presence of the
Observer.
211. What are the
transparency
measures during
Counting of Votes?
The Commission appoints “Observers” for Counting of
Votes also. They supervise the complete Counting
procedure with the help of Micro Observers. A counting
supervisor is also appointed at every counting table. During
EVM counting, the agents of candidates are shown that the
seals of Control Units are intact and total polled votes are
the same as informed to their polling agent at the end of
poll. After that full counting procedure is done before them.
Observer also does random check from each round of
Counting to ensure the error-free counting procedure. At
the end of the EVM counting, the Commission has also
directed to count VVPAT Paper Slips of randomly selected
5 polling Stations of each AC/AS to match the same with
corresponding CU result. Videography arrangements are
also made during counting of votes.
212. What happens if
during the
rechecking by the
Observer, any
mismatch is
found?
If any discrepancy is found between the result obtained
from the table and that ascertained through the random
checking by the observer, then: -
• The result of that round for each table shall be reverified from the CU.
• The erring official would be taken off and replaced
by another set of staff. Severe
disciplinary action should be initiated against him/her.
• The result provided by such staff (and table) in the
preceding rounds would be checked again in presence of
Observer and corrected sheets prepared wherever
necessary.
213. What happens if
the close button of
CU was not
pressed on the day
of Poll?
In case of close button was not pressed at the end of poll,
the agents shall be informed accordingly before starting the
procedure of counting, then total Button of the CU should
be pressed to see total votes in CU.
• If total votes polled in the CU tallies with total votes
polled in CU mentioned in Form 17C, result from the CU
37
shall be ascertained after pressing Close button and then
Result button.
• If total votes polled in the CU does not tally with
total votes polled in CU mentioned in Form 17 C, the CU is
to be kept back in carrying case under RO’s custody
214. What happens if it
is found that the
mock poll data is
not deleted from
CU or VVPAT
mock poll slips
were not taken out
from VVPAT or
total votes polled
in CU does not
match record of
votes in Form
17C?
In all pre-identified such cases (on poll day, during scrutiny
of documents on P+1day etc.), their lists shall be shared
with the contesting candidates before the commencement
of counting. In all such cases CU(s) shall not be brought to
the counting hall for retrieving result from that Control
Unit(s). The following procedure is followed1. If the winning margin is more than the total votes polled
in all such polling stations, these polling stations, identified
as mentioned above, will not be taken up for counting and
the result will be declared without these polling stations.
2. If the winning margin is equal to or less than total votes
polled in these polling stations, in such case only counting
of the respective VVPAT paper slips will be done.
3. Even in cases where VVPAT paper slips pertaining to
mock poll have not been taken out from the drop box of the
VVPAT, the VVPAT slips shall be counted and the candidate
wise votes from mock poll certificate shall be deducted to
arrive at correct count of candidate wise votes polled.
4. The VVPAT slip count result of all these polling stations
shall be added to the candidate wise tally and the final
result compiled.
5. If there is any discrepancy or difficulty to arrive at correct
count of candidate wise votes polled, the matter shall be
referred to the Commission for further direction in the
matter.
215. What are the cases
in which VVPAT
Slip counting is
done apart from
mandatory
counting of 5
Polling Stations?
Apart from mandatory VVPAT slip counting of randomly
selected 5 Polling Stations, VVPAT slips are also counted in
the following cases1. In case result is not displayed on the Display Panel of
the Control Unit.
2. In case of improper conduct of mock poll procedure by
non-clearance of mock poll data/slips or mismatch of votes
polled in CU and votes polled in CU mentioned in Form17C, if winning margin is equal to or less than total votes
polled in these polling stations.
3. If the counting of VVPAT Slips is demanded by the
Candidate/Counting Agent under Rule 56D and RO
decides (speaking order) to count the printed paper slips of
any polling station(s) on a written application received from
any candidate/election agent/counting agent under Rule
56(D).
216. What happens if
the margin of
victory is less than
the number of
postal ballot
papers rejected as
invalid at the time
of counting?
All the rejected Postal Ballot papers shall be mandatorily
re-verified by the Returning Officer before declaration of
result. Whenever, such re-verification is done, the entire
proceedings should be video graphed.
38
217. Is recounting of
votes allowed? If
yes, what is the
procedure?
Despite the necessity for recount being totally eliminated
by the use of voting machines, the provisions relating to
recount contained in Rule 63 of the Conduct of Elections
Rules, 1961, still apply. Any candidate or, in his absence,
his election agent or any of the counting agents, can ask
for a recount. A candidate has option to make request for
recount of polled ballot papers and/or polled EVMs of all or
some of the polling stations. If RO receives an application
for recount, he should consider the grounds urged and
decide the matter judiciously. RO may allow the application
in whole or in part if it is reasonable or may reject the same
if it appears to be frivolous or unreasonable.
218. Who is the
custodian of
EVMs, VVPATs
and other
documents after
counting of votes?
District Election Officer is the custodian of EVMs, VVPATs
and other documents after counting of votes.
219. How are the strong
rooms locked and
who is the
custodian of keys?
All strong rooms having sensitive election materials have
double lock system for which keys of lock-1 are kept with
the District Election Officer and keys of lock-2 are kept with
the Dy. DEO or the equivalent officer not below the rank of
Dy. DEO.
39
OTHER IMPORTANT FAQs
ELECTION MACHINERY
S.No. Question Answer
220. What is the
Composition of polling
party?
Generally, the composition of a polling party is –
1. Presiding Officer and 3 polling personnel
2. Presiding officer and 5 polling personnel
(for simultaneous election).
221. How are the polling
personnel drafted?
A data base of government officials is prepared
approx. 6 month before the election by the
District Election Officer and appointment is done
on need basis as per Commission’s instructions.
222. What is the procedure
for allotment of duties
to Polling Personnel?
After the preparation of database, three stage
randomization is done before allocating duties to
polling personnel: -
1. Approx.40 days before poll
2. Approx. 15 days before poll
3. 1 day before poll (i.e. dispersal day)
223. Who are exempted from
election duty?
Certain categories of employees are exempted
from election duty as mentioned in Commission’s
latest instruction on the subject matter.
224. If any person on
election duty dies on
duty, is there any
provision to help his
family?
Yes. As per Commission’s instructions, if any
person on election duty dies on duty, his family
is entitled to be given ex-gratia compensation as
prescribed by the Commission.
225. What are the facilities
for polling personnel?
The Commission has prescribed detailed welfare
measures for polling personnel, which include
health care facilities, drinking water, separate
washrooms for male and female, vehicle parking,
food/refreshments, helpdesk/helpline, transport
and accommodation, proper security etc.
226. How can polling
personnel cast their
vote?
Polling personnel on duty are entitled to cast
their vote through Postal Ballot/Election Duty
Certificate (EDC). If they are appointed in their
home AC/AS, the can apply for EDC. Postal
Ballot Facilities are made available on training
centers.
227. Is there any training
imparted to polling
personnel?
Yes. The polling personnel (including the reserve)
are given three round of training before they are
sent for poll duty. The last training is conducted
on dispersal center itself so that if any polling
personnel has any doubt, he/she can get it
clarified before departing to poll duty.
VACANCY
228. If any vacancy arises
due to resignation,
disqualification or
death, what is the time
limit to hold byeelection ?
As per Section 151(A) of the representation of
People Act, 1951, a Bye-Election for filling any
casual vacancy is to be held within six months
from the date of occurrence of the vacancy, if the
remainder of the term of the House is not less
than one year.
229. How is a vacancy
reported?
As soon as a vacancy occurred due to any of the
reasons (resignation, disqualification death), it is
to be notified by the respective Legislative
Assembly/Lok Sabha. The CEO of the State/UT
40
shall pursue the issue, ascertain the vacancy
position and report the same to the Commission.
SCRUTINY OF FORM 17A
230. Why is the scrutiny of
Form 17A and other
documents done?
To identify the cases of poll vitiation and to detect
even subtle and concealed electoral malpractices
at any polling station, thorough scrutiny of
critical documents is done under the supervision
on RO and Observer.
231. Are contesting
candidates allowed to
be present during
scrutiny?
Yes, the contesting candidates are given advance
notice in writing, under proper
acknowledgement, so that they or their
authorised election agents/representatives may
remain present to watch the proceedings of
scrutiny of Form 17A.
232. What are the
documents to be
scrutinised?
Generally, the following documents are
scrutinised1. Presiding Officer’s Diary;
2. Form 17A;
3. Micro Observer’s Report;
4. Visitor Sheet;
5. Sector Officer’s Report;
6. Presiding Officer’s Report;
7. Still Photography/ Videography
Recordings;
8. CCTV/Webcasting footage;
9. Form 14A (List of Blind /infirm Voters), if
any
233. What is the procedure
for opening and closing
of strong room having
Form 17A and other
documents?
Form 17A and other documents (which are to be
scrutinised) are kept in a separate strong room
(other than having polled EVMs and VVPATs).
The strong room are opened, at the time so
appointed, in the presence of DEO/RO, Observer
and contesting candidates/their authorised
agents under videography. After taking out the
packets of relevant documents for scrutiny, the
strong room are duly closed and sealed and entry
in log book is made accordingly.
234. What is the procedure if
the documents are to
be transported to some
other place?
If the relevant papers for scrutiny of Form 17A
and other documents are required to be
transported, the same shall be done under
proper police escort along with executive
magistrate. The candidates are properly
informed about the travel plan and they are also
allowed to follow the vehicle transporting
relevant papers.
235. What is the criteria for
selecting Polling
Stations for scrutiny?
The selection of polling stations for scrutiny of
Form 17A and other documents is done on the
following grounds1. If any complaint of poll rigging,
malpractices etc. was received;
2. If any significant event (EVM/VVPAT
related or otherwise) was reported;
3. If poll took place in the absence of any
polling agent or in the presence of the
agent of only one candidate;
41
4. If the number of electors who cast their
vote using documents other than EPIC
exceeded 25% of the total votes cast;
5. If more than 10% of such electors who had
been identified as ASD turned up and
voted;
6. If polling percentage of the polling is plus
15% or minus 15% than the average
polling percentage;
7. If there are at least 5 tendered votes and
challenged votes have been reported;
8. If there are 10% or more remarks coloum
of Register of Voters (Form-17A) are blank
and does not indicate use of
EPIC/Alternate document;
9. If Micro Observer has submitted an
adverse report.
236. When is the scrutiny of
documents taken up?
The scrutiny of Form 17A is taken up preferably
at 11:00 AM on the day following the day of poll.
RO, in presence of Observer, shall do the
scrutiny with utmost care and shall submit a
report to the Commission as soon as scrutiny is
over.
237. What is the postscrutiny procedure?
After scrutiny, the material shall be re-sealed
with the seal of RO. The candidates or their
representatives are also allowed to affix their
seals. These sealed envelopes shall then be kept
back in the strong room from which they were
taken out and the room be sealed with the seal
of RO, in the presence of the candidates or their
representatives. After completion of scrutiny, the
RO and Observer shall make their
recommendations to the Commission for repoll,
if warranted.
OTHERS
238. What is the roll of
Observer during
election process?
Observers (General, Police and Expenditure) are
appointed by the Commission to keep watch on
complete election process. They are supposed to
interact with candidates as well as general public
to ensure smooth, transparent and error-free
election. Observers send various reports to the
Commission time-to-time and also have face-toface interaction through video-conference.
Commission takes crucial decisions during an
election process on the basis of various inputs
including Observers’. During Counting also, the
Counting Observer appointed by the Commission
oversee the complete Counting Process till the
announcement of result.
239. Can
MPs/MLAs/Ministers
etc. use official
vehicles for
campaigning,
electioneering or
No. there is a total and absolute ban on the use
of official vehicle for campaigning, electioneering
or other election related travel. The ban on the
use of official vehicle will equally apply to vehicles
in or from any State not going to the polls but
whose official vehicles are attempted to be used
42
other election
purpose?
for campaign, either openly or clandestinely, in
any other State going to poll.
240. Is there any
exemption in using
official vehicle for
election purpose?
The only exemption is the Prime Minister and
other political personalities, who might, in view
of extremist and terrorist activities and threat to
their lives, require security of a high order and
whose security requirements are governed by
statutory provisions made by the Parliament or
the State Legislature.
The restrictions shall also not be applicable in
case of Hon’ble President and Vice President of
India.
In case of Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Lok
Sabha and Chairman of Rajya Sabha,
restrictions will be applicable during General
Election to Lok Sabha but not during Legislative
Assembly Election.
241. How is a permit for use
of vehicle for campaign
or electioneering
purpose issued to a
Candidate?
Before the campaigning commences, the
Candidate is required to furnish several details
to the District Election Officer (DEO) like
registration details of the vehicle, fitness
certificates, particulars of the owner and driver,
area of campaigning etc. The DEO is the
competent authority to issue such permits.
Vehicles can only be used after obtaining
necessary permits. Any vehicle used for
campaigning without permit may attract penal
provisions.
242. Who issues permits for
vehicles which move
throughout the State
for campaigning or
distribution of
campaign material?
The Chief Electoral Officer of the State is the
competent authority to issue such permits.
243. What are the preventive
measures to maintain
Law and Order during
Elections?
The Commission, in consultation of Chief
Electoral Officers and District Election Officers
deploy Central Armed Police Forces, State Police
Force, Home guards etc. during election to
maintain Law and order.
244. How is the requirement
of CAPF or Police Force
assessed?
Before every election, the CEO/DEO conducts
“Vulnerability Mapping Exercise” to identify
critical Polling Stations. This provides clear
requirement of forces and their proper
deployment to maintain law and order during
elections.Qs
How to Vote
How to Vote
You can vote only if your name appears in the Voter List (also known as Electoral Roll). Voters can also find information on Polling Booths, Contesting candidates, Election Dates & Timings, Identity cards and EVM.
Top Actions
top-actions
Where to vote
Know your candidate
Where to check voter registration status?
You can only vote if your name appears in the Voter List (also known as electoral roll). Verify your name on the list by either:

Logging on to https://electoralsearch.eci.gov.in
Calling the Voter Helpline 1950 (please add your STD code before dialling)
SMS space to 1950 (EPIC stands for Electors Photo Identity Card also commonly known as Voter ID card). Example - If your EPIC is 12345678 then sms ECI 12345678 to 1950
Download Voter Helpline App (Android) and Voter Helpline App (iOS)
Who are the candidates?
Voters can visit Candidate Affidavit Portal (click here) or download the Voter Helpline App (Android) and Voter Helpline App (iOS) to see the list of candidates. Please note this data is updated as affidavits are filed by candidates.

Where do I vote?
Voters can go to https://electoralsearch.eci.gov.in or use Voter Helpline App (Android) and Voter Helpline App (iOS) to find their polling booth
Voters can call the Voter Helpline, the number is 1950 (please add your STD code before dialling)
For Polling station location SMS space to 1950
Mobile phones, cameras or any other gadget is not allowed inside a polling booth.

How do I vote in person?
First polling official will check your name on the voter list and check your ID proof
Second polling official will ink your finger, give you a slip and take your signature on a register (Form 17A)
You will have to deposit the slip at the third polling official and show your inked finger and then proceed to the polling booth
Record your vote by pressing the ballot button opposite the symbol of the candidate of your choice on the Electronic Voting Machine (EVM); You will hear a beep sound
Check the slip that appears in the transparent window of the VVPAT machine. The slip with the Candidate serial No., Name and Symbol shall be visible for 7 seconds before it drops in the sealed VVPAT box
You can press NOTA, None of the Above, if you don't like any candidate; it's the last button on the EVM
For more information, please see the Voter Guide on ecisveep.nic.in
Mobile phones, cameras or any other gadget is not allowed inside a polling booth.

How do I use EVM?
EVM stands for Electronic Voting Machine and VVPAT stands for Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT). Click to see video for how to vote using EVM VVPAT
EVM-VVPAT : see this video for more details
What Identification should I bring to vote?
Voters can carry any of the below mentioned recognized ID cards for polling, Photo Voter Slip shall not be accepted as a stand-alone identification document for voting.

EPIC (Voter ID card)
Passport
Driving License
Service Identity Cards with photograph issued to employees by Central/State Govt./PSUs/Public Limited Companies
Passbooks with photograph issued by Bank/Post Office
PAN Card
Smart Card issued by RGI under NPR
MNREGA Job Card (Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee)
Health Insurance Smart Card issued under the scheme of Ministry of Labour
Pension document with photograph
Official identity cards issued to MPs/MLAs/MLCs
Aadhaar Card
When is the Election?
1st Phase, No. of PCs are 102, No. of States 21, Poll Date 19-04-2024.
2nd Phase, No. of PCs are 89, No. of States 13, Poll Date 26-04-2024.
3rd Phase, No. of PCs are 94, No. of States 12, Poll Date 07-05-2024.
4th Phase, No. of PCs are 96, No. of States 10, Poll Date 13-05-2024.
5th Phase, No. of PCs are 49, No. of States 08, Poll Date 20-05-2024.
6th Phase, No. of PCs are 57, No. of States 07, Poll Date 25-05-2024.
7th Phase, No. of PCs are 57, No. of States 08, Poll Date 01-06-2024.
Please check elections24.eci.gov.in for more information